The Year A Million People Watched Me Screw Up

Towards the end of last year, I wrote a conference talk called "The Art of Code". My friends Jess and Moreton were organising a brand new conference - DDD East Midlands - and asked if I'd like to do the opening keynote. The conference would be on a Saturday, and it would be free to attend, so I thought this would be a great opportunity to put together something a little bit different - after all, if anybody complained, we could just give them their money back, right?

I came up with about four hours of material, that I whittled down into a journey through many of my favourite areas of creative computer science - cellular automata, fractal geometry, complex numbers, computer vision, esoteric languages, finishing up with the story of how I created Rockstar and a live performance of "FizzBuzz". I gave this talk at DDD East Midlands, at 9am on a rainy Saturday in Nottingham; I gave it again in Krakow, Lithuania, Kyiv at the end of last year, and then as a keynote at Flutter Europe in Warsaw in January. Adding it to the programme at NDC London was very much an afterthought - another speaker had to leave early which left a room open during the last spot on Friday, so we shuffled a few things around and I took that spot. I'd been on stage with The Linebreakers at the party the night before, I was frantically finishing up preparation for PubConf, which was happening on Friday straight after NDC finished up - and right outside the QE2 conference centre in Westminster, crowds of people were gathering to "celebrate" the UK officially leaving the European Union at midnight that night.

I did the talk, and it didn't go great. My Macbook Pro had developed a weird display bug two days earlier, so I was using my backup laptop - a Microsoft Surface - to deliver the presentation, and I hadn't realised that the typeface used for a lot of my code sample slides wasn't installed on Windows. If you watch the video of the talk from NDC closely, there's several points where things like string highlighting don't line up properly, and one point where I actually stop to check the slides because what I was seeing really didn't match my recollection of what the slides were supposed to look like.

No big deal. You do enough conference talks, you're gonna have some off days. The 40 or so folks in the room seemed to enjoy it, the NDC crew got the whole thing on video, as they always do, and then a month later the entire world turned upside-down and I completely forgot about.

But... at some point during 2020, the YouTube algorithms found it and decided it was shiny, and started recommending it to people. Whatever those people did, it reinforced that algorithm, and it was recommended to more, and more, and more people. 100,000 views. 250,000. Half a million. A million. Right now it's 

